.TH gensio_os_funcs 3 "23 Feb 2019"
.SH NAME
gensio_os_funcs \- Abstraction for some operating system functions used
by the gensio library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <gensio/gensio_os_funcs_public.h>
.PP
.B struct gensio_os_funcs {}
.PP
.B int gensio_default_os_hnd(int wake_sig, struct gensio_os_funcs **o)
.PP
.B int gensio_unix_funcs_alloc(struct selector_s *sel, int wake_sig,
.br
		struct gensio_os_funcs **o)
.PP
.B int gensio_win_funcs_alloc(struct gensio_os_funcs **o)
.PP
.B void gensio_os_funcs_free(struct gensio_os_funcs *o);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_proc_setup(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
			 struct gensio_os_proc_data **data)
.PP
.B void gensio_os_proc_cleanup(struct gensio_os_proc_data *data);
.PP
.B sigset_t *gensio_os_proc_unix_get_wait_sigset(
.br
                         struct gensio_os_proc_data *data);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_new_thread(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
			 void (*start_func)(void *data), void *data,
.br
			 struct gensio_thread **thread_id);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_wait_thread(struct gensio_thread *thread_id);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_proc_register_term_handler(struct gensio_os_proc_data *data,
.br
					 void (*handler)(void *handler_data),
.br
					 void *handler_data);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_proc_register_reload_handler(struct gensio_os_proc_data *data,
.br
					   void (*handler)(void *handler_data),
.br
					   void *handler_data);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_proc_register_winsize_handler(struct gensio_os_proc_data *data,
.br
					struct gensio_iod *console_iod,
.br
					void (*handler)(int x_chrs, int y_chrs,
.br
							int x_bits, int y_bits,
.br
							void *handler_data),
.br
					void *handler_data);
.PP
.B void *gensio_os_funcs_zalloc(struct gensio_os_funcs *o, gensiods len);
.PP
.B void gensio_os_funcs_zfree(struct gensio_os_funcs *o, void *data);
.PP
.B struct gensio_lock *gensio_os_funcs_alloc_lock(struct gensio_os_funcs *o);
.PP
.B void gensio_os_funcs_free_lock(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
			       struct gensio_lock *lock);
.PP
.B void gensio_os_funcs_lock(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
			  struct gensio_lock *lock);
.PP
.B void gensio_os_funcs_unlock(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
			    struct gensio_lock *lock);
.PP
.B void gensio_os_funcs_get_monotonic_time(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
					gensio_time *time);
.PP
.B struct gensio_timer *gensio_os_funcs_alloc_timer(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
				    void (*handler)(struct gensio_timer *t,
.br
						    void *cb_data),
.br
				    void *cb_data);
.PP
.B void gensio_os_funcs_free_timer(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
				struct gensio_timer *timer);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_funcs_start_timer(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
				struct gensio_timer *timer,
.br
				gensio_time *timeout);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_funcs_start_timer_abs(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
				    struct gensio_timer *timer,
.br
				    gensio_time *timeout);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_funcs_stop_timer(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
			       struct gensio_timer *timer);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_funcs_stop_timer_with_done(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
			    struct gensio_timer *timer,
.br
			    void (*done_handler)(struct gensio_timer *t,
.br
						 void *cb_data),
.br
			    void *cb_data);
.PP
.B struct gensio_runner *gensio_os_funcs_alloc_runner(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
				      void (*handler)(struct gensio_runner *r,
.br
						      void *cb_data),
.br
				      void *cb_data);
.PP
.B void gensio_os_funcs_free_runner(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
				 struct gensio_runner *runner);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_funcs_run(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
			struct gensio_runner *runner);
.PP
.B typedef void (gensio_vlog_func)(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
				enum gensio_log_levels level,
.br
				const char *log, va_list args);
.br
.PP
.B void gensio_os_funcs_set_vlog(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
                              gensio_vlog_func func);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_funcs_service(struct gensio_os_funcs *o, gensio_time *timeout);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_funcs_handle_fork(struct gensio_os_funcs *o);
.PP
.B struct gensio_waiter *gensio_os_funcs_alloc_waiter(struct gensio_os_funcs *o);
.PP
.B void gensio_os_funcs_free_waiter(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
				 struct gensio_waiter *waiter);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_funcs_wait(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
			 struct gensio_waiter *waiter, unsigned int count,
.br
			 gensio_time *timeout);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_funcs_wait_intr(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
			      struct gensio_waiter *waiter, unsigned int count,
.br
			      gensio_time *timeout);
.PP
.B int gensio_os_funcs_wait_intr_sigmask(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
				      struct gensio_waiter *waiter,
.br
				      unsigned int count,
.br
				      gensio_time *timeout,
.br
				      struct gensio_os_proc_data *proc_data);
.PP
.B void gensio_os_funcs_wake(struct gensio_os_funcs *o,
.br
			  struct gensio_waiter *waiter);
.PP
.B void gensio_os_funcs_set_data(struct gensio_os_funcs *o, void *data);
.PP
.B void *gensio_os_funcs_get_data(struct gensio_os_funcs *o);
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
This structure provides an abstraction for the gensio library that
lets it work with various event libraries.  It provides the following
basic functions:
.TP
memory allocation \- Allocate and free memory.
.TP
mutexes \- Provide mutual exclusion.
.TP
file handler callbacks \- Allows file descriptors to be monitored
and report when I/O is ready on them.
.TP
timers \- Call callbacks after a certain amount of time has elapsed.
.TP
runners \- Run a function in a new execution context.  Calling callbacks
straight from user functions can result in deadlocks, this provides a
way to call callbacks from a separate context.
.TP
waiters \- Wait for operations to occur while running timers, runners
and watching for file descriptors.
.TP
logging \- Allow the gensio library to generate logs to report issues.
.PP

This document describes the public functions that users can use.  An
os handler has many other functions for use by gensios, these are
documented in the os funcs include file.

The basic issue is that there are various event handling libraries
(Tcl/Tk, glib, Xlib, custom ones, etc.) and you may want to integrate
the gensio library with one of these.  Even though it's a bit of a
pain to have to pass one of these around, it adds needed flexibility.

.B gensio_default_os_hnd
provides a way to allocate a default OS function handler for the
platform.  The same value will be returned each time, only one is
created.  You should generally use this one unless you have a special
need as documented above.

The
.I wait_sig
parameter usage on Windows is unused.  For Unix systems, this signal
is used to signal other processes that may be waiting that they need
to wake up.  This is used to wake up a process waiting on a waiter,
and it's used to signal all waiting processes if a timer is added that
is sooner than any other timer so they can adjust their waits.

If you are running your program in a single thread, you can safely
pass zero into this parameter.

If your app is multi-threaded (or, more accurately, if your app has
multiple threads that are making gensio calls) you must pass a valid
signal into this, and you must set up an empty handler for this
signal, and the signal must be blocked in all threads that call a wait
function.  You should not use this signal for anything else.  The
function that allocates a signal handler will block the signal in the
calling thread, and that sigmask is passed on to other threads it
creates.  But if you have allocated threads before allocating the os
funcs, you must make sure those other threads have this signal
blocked.

Also, if you pass in a different value to
.B gensio_default_os_hnd
than the first one you passed in, it will return
.I GE_INVAL.
You can pass in different values to
.B gensio_unix_funcs_alloc
calls, and it will use them, but there's not much value in this.  The
os funcs for Unix can share a signal handler.  And there's not much
value is multiple OS funcs, anyway.

.B gensio_unix_funcs_alloc
and
.B gensio_win_funcs_alloc
allocate the normal os funcs for Unix and Windows based systems,
respectively.

The
.I sel
parameter for Unix allows you to create your own selector object and
pass it to the OS handler.  Passing in NULL will cause it to allocate
it's own selector object.  See the selector.h include file for details.

The
.I wake_sig
value is a signal for use by the OS functions for internal
communication between threads.  If you are running a multi-threaded
application, you must provide a valid signal that you don't use for
any other purpose, generally
.B SIGUSR1
or
.B SIGUSR2.
You can use
.B GENSIO_DEF_WAKE_SIG
which is zero on Windows and
.B SIGUSR1
on Unix.

The
.I gensio_os_proc_setup
function does all the standard setup for a process.  You should almost
certainly use this function.  On Windows this sets up some basic
things so termination registering will work, but on Unix it does all
the signal handling setup, so you don't have to do all the things
mentioned above.  This will block SIGPIPE (because those come in when
connections die and most applications don't care), SIGCHLD (those come
in for stdio and pty gensios), and the
.I wake_sig
if that is set.  It also install signal handlers for SIGCHLD and the
.I wake_sig
(if set) and sets up a signal mask.

For Unix this is generally what you want, you don't want SIGPIPE doing
bad things and having SIGCHLD wake up a wait can speed things up a bit
when waiting for subprograms.

If you use the
.I gensio_os_funcs_wait_intr_sigmask
OS function, you must pass the proc_data value returned by
.I gensio_os_proc_setup
into that.  If you want to modify the wait signal mask, you can use
.I gensio_os_proc_unix_get_wait_sigset
to fetch a pointer to it and modify it.

The
.I gensio_os_proc_cleanup
function undoes all the changes
.I gensio_os_proc_setup
does, along with unregistering any signal handlers done by register
calls.  On Unix it restores the signal mask and signal handlers it
sets to their previous values.  On Windows it remove registered
handlers.

The
.I gensio_os_new_thread
function starts a new thread at
.B start_func
passing in the given data value.  It returns a
.B thread_id
that you must pass into the wait function.  This is just basic generic
threads, you can use your OS functions if you need more control over
the threads.  If you use threads, make sure to see the notes above
about setting up for them properly.

The
.I gensio_os_wait_thread
waits for a thread to stop.  Note that it does not cause the thread to
stop, it waits for it to stop.  You have to cause the thread to stop
yourself.

The
.I gensio_os_proc_register_term_handler
function passes a handler to call when a termination (SIGINT, SIGQUIT,
SIGTERM on Unix, console control handler or WM_CLOSE on windows) is
received by the process.  Set
.B handler
to
.B NULL
to disable.  If you do this on Unix, the signals will be blocked
except when in a wait or service call.

The
.I gensio_os_proc_register_reload_handler
sets the function to call when a reload is requested by the
operating system (SIGHUP on Unix).
Set
.B handler
to
.B NULL
to disable.  On Unix, this will cause SIGHUP to be blocked except when
in a wait or service call.

The
.I gensio_os_proc_register_winsize_handler
function sets the function to call when a console window size change
is requested by the operating system (SIGWINCH on Unix).  It will supply
the new size parameters.  Set
.B handler
to
.B NULL
to disable.  Note that the handler will be called with current window
size parameters after this is called.

.B gensio_os_funcs_zalloc
allocates a block of memory and zeroes it.  The
.B gensio
library has it's own allocator/deallocator that is using in testing to
track if all allocated data is freed when the tests shut down, and to
catch memory overruns, underruns, and use after free errors.  Returns
.B NULL
if the memory cannot be allocated.  Use
.B gensio_os_funcs_zfree
to free the allocated memory.

.B gensio_os_funcs_alloc_lock
allocates a mutex that can be used for locking by the user.  Use
.B gensio_os_funcs_lock
and
.B gensio_os_funcs_unlock
to lock/unlock the mutex.  The
.B gensio_os_funcs_free_lock
will make sure the lock is not locked and free the data associated
with the lock.  Note that even for os funcs that don't implement
locks, this will implement a counter to make sure that all locks are
balanced.

.B gensio_os_funcs_get_monotonic_time
returns a time value from the monotonic clock used for
.B gensio_os_start_timer_abs.
It can also be used as a standard monotonic clock, but is not a wall
clock of any kind.

.B gensio_os_funcs_set_vlog
.I must
be called by the user to set a log handling function for the os funcs.
If something goes wrong internally in the gensio library, this log
function will be called to report the issue.

Timers are allocated with
.B gensio_os_funcs_alloc_timer.
When the timer expires, the
.B handlers
will be called with the given
.B cb_data.
This will return
.B NULL
if the timer cannot be allocated.  Timers are not running when
allocated, the must be started with
.B gensio_os_funcs_start_timer,
or
.B gensio_os_funcs_start_timer_abs.
The first starts a timer relative to the current time.  The second
starts a timer based upon a monotonic clock, see
.B gensio_os_funcs_get_monotonic_time
for details.  These will return
.B GE_INUSE
if the timer was already running.  To stop a timer, call either
.B gensio_os_funcs_stop_timer
or
.B gensio_os_funcs_stop_timer_with_done.
These both return
.B GE_TIMEDOUT
if the timer is not running.  The first has no way to assure that the
timer is finished running its handlers; the timer handler may still be
active when it returns.  If it does not return an error, the second
will call the
.B done_handler
function when the timer is completely stopped and all the handlers are
finished.  The second also returns
.B GE_INUSE
if the timer has already been stopped but the done handler hasn't been
called yet.  Note that you cannot start the timer again until the done
handler is called.  And finally, to free a timer, use
.B gensio_os_funcs_free_timer.
The timer should not be running when calling this.

Runners are sort of like zero-time timers, they will just be called
immediately.  They are useful for escaping from deep locking
situations where you want to do something at the base context.  Use
.B gensio_os_funcs_alloc_runner
to allocate one of these.  It returns
.B NULL
if the runner cannot be allocated.
.B gensio_os_funcs_run
causes the handler to be called.  It returns
.B GE_INUSE
if the runner is currently already scheduled to be run.  And
.B gensio_os_funcs_free_runner
frees the runner.  It should not be currently scheduled to run.

.B gensio_os_funcs_service
provides the main service function to run timers, runners, I/O
handling, etc.  If it is interrupted by a signal (on Unix), it returns
.B GE_INTERRUPTED.
If
.B timeout
is non-NULL, it is a relative amount of time to wait and this will return
.B GE_TIMEDOUT
if the timeout expires.  Note that for long timeouts (days) this may
return early on some os funcs, so don't rely on this for timing.  When
this returns, the timeout will be updated to any remaining time, even
on an early timeout.  Generally you don't use this function, you use
waiters instead.

Call
.B gensio_os_funcs_handle_fork
in the child function after a fork (Unix only).  This cleans up
various things and readies the gensio library to be used after a fork.
If this returns an error, it is likely that the gensio library is
unusable on the child.

Waiters are used to wait for things to happen.  When the thing happens
occurs, that code should call wake to wake the waiter.  Normal
servicing of tiers, runners, I/O, etc. are done while waiting.
Waiters and wakes are count based, if you call the wake before the
wait that's ok, the wake will be waiting when the wait happens.  If
you call wake 3 times, there are 3 wakes pending.  To allocate a
waiter, call
.B gensio_os_funcs_alloc_waiter.
It returns NULL if it cannot allocate the waiter.
.B gensio_os_funcs_wait
waits for
.B count
wakeups to be done and then returns zero.  If
.B timeout
is
.B NULL
it waits forever.  Otherwise if the timeout expires it returns
.B GE_TIMEDOUT
and the timeout is updated to the remaining time.  If this times out,
no wakeups are "used" by the function, if only some are pending those
are still pending.
.B gensio_os_funcs_wait_intr
is like
.B gensio_os_funcs_wait
except if an signal is received (Unix only) it will return
.B GE_INTERRUPTED.
.B gensio_os_funcs_wait_intr_sigmask
is like
.B gensio_os_funcs_wait_intr
but allows a user-specified signal mask to be installed (Unix only).  See
.B gensio_os_proc_setup
for details.  To send a single wakeup to a waiter, use
.B gensio_os_funcs_wake.
And, of course, call
.B gensio_os_funcs_free_waiter
to free a waiter.

An os funcs has a single void pointer that the user may install some
data in for their own use.  Use
.B gensio_os_funcs_set_data
to set this data and
.B gensio_os_funcs_get_data
to retrieve it.

.SH "RETURN VALUES"
Return values are documented in the text above.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
gensio_set_log_mask(3), gensio_get_log_mask(3), gensio_log_level_to_str(3),
gensio(5), gensio_err(3)
