.TH gensio_control 3 "27 Feb 2019"
.SH NAME
gensio_control \- Perform gensio-specific actions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <gensio/gensio.h>
.TP 20
.B int gensio_control(struct gensio *io, int depth, bool get,
.br
.B                    unsigned int option,
.br
.B                    char *data, gensiods *datalen);
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.B gensio_control
performs a gensio-specific operation on the gensio (if
.I depth
is 0) or
one of its children (
.I depth > 0).  If depth is
.I GENSIO_CONTROL_DEPTH_ALL,
then call all the children with the data.
.I GE_NOTSUP
error returns from individual gensios are ignored in that case, but it
will stop at the first error besides that.  If depth is
GENSIO_CONTROL_DEPTH_FIRST, it will return on the first gensio that
doesn't return
.I GE_NOTSUP.
It returns
.I GE_NOTFOUND
if nothing handled it.

If you specify a depth >= 0, and depth is greater than the number of
gensios in the stack, this will return
.I GE_NOTFOUND.
This way you can know if you reached the bottom of the stack.

Most controls use normal strings for configuration, a control will be
this way unless othersise specified.  Some controls allow binary
information to be passed.

If
.I get
is
.I GENSIO_CONTROL_GET
(true), attempt to fetch the option.  You cannot use
.I GENSIO_CONTROL_DEPTH_ALL
with a fetch.  To fetch an option, you must pass in data long
enough to hold the output and set
.I datalen
to the number of bytes available in
.I data
for the output.  It will return the length of the string (like strlen,
not including the terminating nil) or binary data in
.I datalen.

An operation with
.I get
set to
.I GENSIO_CONTROL_SET
(false) is a set operation, it will set values or controls in the gensio.
For string values,
.I datalen
is not used in a put operation or for determining the length
of the input string in
.I data,
it must be a nil terminated string.  For binary values,
.I datalen
must be provided.

A get operation is alway indepotent (it won't change anything, so
multiple calls will not have any effect on the state of the system).
A get operation may or may not use information passed in
.I data,
and returns information in the
.I data
field.

If the output does not fit in a get operation,
.I datalen
is updated to where it would have been if it had enough bytes (one
less than the total number of bytes required for string controls), but
the output in
.I data
is truncated (and nil terminated if possible for string controls).
This can be used to probe to see how long a buffer is required by
passing in a zero
.I *datalen,
and then allocating
.I *datalen
(+ 1 for string gensios) and calling the function again with that data.

gensio control operations in
.I option
depend on the particular gensio.  Below some are documented, but there
may be other controls available.  See the gensio documentation in
gensio(5) for details.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_NODELAY"
Set the enable/disable for any NAGLE type algorithms.
For put the
.I data
should be a string "1" to disable delay, or "0" to enable delay.
Return value from a get is a string "1" or "0".
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_STREAMS"
Return information about incoming and outgoing streams for the gensio.
This is read(get)-only and returns the value in the data in the form
"instream=<n>,ostream=<n>".  Used by SCTP.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_SEND_BREAK"
Request that a break be sent over the line (primarily for telnet).
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_GET_PEER_CERT_NAME"
Return the object from the certificate from the remote end.  This is
primarily for SSL and certauth so the application can validate the
certificate's common name, but it can fetch any object from the
certificate.

There are two ways to use this interface: fetch by index or fetch
by object type.

To fetch by index, just pass in a number in the data, like "0"
and it will fetch the value at that index.

To fetch by object type, pass in a number and the object type
separated by a comma.  The object type to fetch is SN (short name) or
LN (long name) descriptor per /usr/include/openssl/object.h.  Like
"CN" or "commonName".  The index should be one less than the start
search, you should use -1, for instance to fetch the first index.

The data returned is in the form: "<index>,<sn>,<value>".
Where sn is the short name.

In fetch by object type mode, there may be more than one of an
object in a certificate, so this interface can handle that.
just pass in the index returned by the first into the second
call and it will start after that index.  For instance, to
fetch the first common name, do (with error checking removed for
clarity):
.IP
strcpy(data, "-1,CN");
.br
gensio_control(io, 0, true, data, &len)
.PP
Say it returns "3,CN,MyName.org"  You would use
.IP
strcpy(data, "3,CN");
.br
gensio_control(io, 0, true, data, &len)
.PP
to get the next common name, which might be "4,CN,MyName2.org".
You get an GE_NOTFOUND at the end.

Returns
.I GE_NOCERT if there is no remote certificate,
.I GE_CERTINVAL
if the passed in object name is not valid, and
.I GE_NOTFOUND
if the object was not available in the certificate.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_CERT_AUTH"
Set the certificate authority file to the string in
.I data.
If it ends in '/', it is assumed to be a directory, otherwise it is
assumed to be a file.  This generally must be done before
authorization is done, generally before open or in the
.I GENSIO_EVENT_PRECERT_VERIFY
event (see gensio_event(3) for details).
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_USERNAME"
Get/set the username for the gensio, generally the username sent from
the client end on a certauth gensio.  This is always a string.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_PASSWORD"
Get/set the password for the gensio, generally the password sent from
the client end on a certauth gensio.  This is always a string.  On the
server side this will only be available in the
.I GENSIO_EVENT_PASSWORD_VERIFY
event. and is cleared outside of that.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_2FA"
Get/set the 2-factor auth data for the gensio, generally the data sent
from the client end on a certauth gensio.  This is non-nil terminated
binary data, generally.  On the server side this will only be
available in the GENSIO_EVENT_PASSWORD_VERIFY event or the
.I GENSIO_2FA_VERIFY
event and is cleared outside of that.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_SERVICE"
On a client, set the service data passed by the gensio to the server.
On a server, et the service sent from the gensio client, generally
available on a certauth server.  Returns
.I GE_DATAMISSING
if a service was not sent.
.PP
This is a binary control, so arbitrary data can be passed in the
service.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_CERT"
Get the full certificate in text form sent from the other end.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_CERT_FINGERPRINT"
Get the fingerprint for the certificate from the other end.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_ENVIRONMENT"
Set the environment pointer for an exec.  For pty and stdio connecter
gensios.  The data is a pointer to an argv array (char * const envp[])
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_ARGS"
Set the arguments for an exec.  For pty and stdio connecter gensios.
The data is a pointer to an argv array (char * const argv[])
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_MAX_WRITE_PACKET"
On a packet gensio, return the maximum packet size that can be sent.
Any write of this amount or less will be sent as a single message
that will be delivered as one read on the other end, or it will
not be sent at all (zero-byte send count).
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_EXIT_CODE"
On a stdio connectors and pty gensios, the exit code of the process
that ran.  This is only valid after close has completed.  An integer
string is returned.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_KILL_TASK"
Attempt to terminate the task.  The passed in string is converted
(strtol) to an integer, if if it non-zero, a forced kill (kill -9) is
done, otherwise a normal terminate is done.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_WAIT_TASK"
On a stdio connectors and pty gensios, do a waitpid on the process.
If it has closed, this will return success and the exit code in the
string.  Otherwise it will return GE_NOTREADY.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_ADD_MCAST"
On UDP connections, add a multicast address that the socket will
receive packets on.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_DEL_MCAST"
On UDP connections, delete a multicast address that the socket will
receive packets on.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_MCAST_LOOP"
On UDP connections, sets whether multicast packets sent on the socket
will be received by the same machine.  Takes/returns string boolean
"true" or "false".  Defaults to false.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_MCAST_TTL"
Sets the multicast time-to-live.  Takes/returns a string integer. The
default is 1, meaning multicast stays in the local network.
Increasing this value increases the number of hops over multicast
routers a send packet will traverse.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_LADDR"
Return the local address for the connection.  Only for network
connections.  Since a single gensio may have more than one local
address, this control provides a means to tell which one.  The
.I data
string passed in should be the string representation of a the number (like
created with snprintf()) for the particular index you want to fetch.  If
you specify a number larger than the number of open listen sockets,
.I GE_NOTFOUND
is returned.  The return data is a string holding the address.

Note that a single fetched string may contain more than one address.
These will be separated by semicolons.  In some cases addresses may
change dynamically (like with SCTP), so you get a single set of
addresses.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_RADDR"
Like
.B GENSIO_CONTROL_LADDR
but gets the remote addresses on a gensio.  The gensio may need to be
open.  This is only implemented on bottom-level gensios, like
serialdev, network interfaces, echo, file, ipmisol, etc.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_RADDR_BIN"
Return the binary remote address for the given gensio.  Only
implemented for network gensios and pty.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_LPORT"
Return the local port for the connection.  Only for network
connections.  This is useful if you pass in "0" for the port to let
the OS chose; you can get the actual port chosen.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_CLOSE_OUTPUT"
Close writing to the gensio, but leave reading along.  This is only
for stdio gensios; it lets you close stdin to the subprogram without
affecting the subprogram's stdout.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_CONNECT_ADDRESS_STR"
Return the address the connection was made to.  For SCTP.
.B gensio_raddr_to_str()
returns all the remote addresses in SCTP's current state.  This will
return the addresses that the original connectx was done to.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_REMOTE_ID"
Return some sort of remote id for what is on the other end of the
connection.  Not implemented for most gensios, only for getting the
pid on a pty and stdio and the file descriptor on serialdev.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_AUX_DATA"
Return auxiliary sent on the connection.  On certauth, this will be
sent to the remote end and be available for them.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_REM_AUX_DATA"
Return auxiliary received from the other end of the connection.  On
certauth, this will be received from the remote end.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_IOD"
Used to get the IOD pointer for the gensio as a raw pointer.  For
gensios that have more than one IOD, the string you pass in will be a
string number representing which IOD, "0" for the first (stdin), "1"
for the second (stdout), and "2" for the third, (stderr).
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_EXTRAINFO"
This enables extra info to be returned on a received UDP packet.  If
this is set to non-zero (normal string like "1" passed in), extra
fields will be added to the auxdata in received packets.  These field
are: "daddr:<address>" with the destination address from the packet
and "ifidx:<n>" with the integer interface index the packet was
received on.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_ENABLE_OOB"
Out of band (OOB) data is disabled by default on all gensios and
setting this to non-zero (normal string like "1" passed in) will
enable it.  Note that you should only set this on the gensio you are
directly communicating with, it is used between some gensios.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_WIN_SIZE"
For pty gensios, sets the window size of the virtual window.  The
value is a string with four values separated by ":".  The first two
are the number of rows and number of columns.  The second two are
number of horizontal pixels and number of vertical pixels.  The pixel
values are currently ignored by windows.  pixel values do not have to
be given, if there are less than 4 values, pixels values are ignored
and set to zero.  datalen is ignored.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_START_DIR"
For pty and stdio gensios (that start another program), this will
cause the new program to run in the given directory instead of the
current directory.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_IN_RATE", "GENSIO_CONTROL_OUT_RATE"
For sound gensios, return the sample rate for the gensio for input or output.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_IN_BUFSIZE", "GENSIO_CONTROL_OUTBUFSIZE"
For sound gensios, return the buffer size in bytes for input our
output.  The data will be delivered to upper layer in chunks of this
size.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_IN_NR_CHANS", "GENSIO_CONTROL_OUT_NR_CHANS"
For sound gensios, return the number of channels for the interface for
input or output.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_IN_FORMAT", "GENSIO_CONTROL_OUT_FORMAT"
For sound gensios, return the format of the user data.  Like "float",
"int16be", etc.
.SS "GENSIO_CONTROL_DRAIN_COUNT"
The amount of data left to be transmitted.  For sound, this is in
frames.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
Zero is returned on success, or a gensio error on failure.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
gensio_err(3), gensio(5)
