.TH gensio_get_type 3 "27 Feb 2019"
.SH NAME
gensio_get_type, gensio_get_child, gensio_is_client, gensio_is_reliable,
gensio_is_packet, gensio_is_authenticated, gensio_is_encrypted,
gensio_is_message
\- Return general information about a gensio
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <gensio/gensio.h>
.TP 20
.B const char *gensio_get_type(struct gensio *io,
.br
.B                             unsigned int depth);
.TP 20
.B struct gensio *gensio_get_child(struct gensio *io,
.br
.B                                 unsigned int depth);
.TP 20
.B bool gensio_is_client(struct gensio *io);
.TP 20
.B bool gensio_is_reliable(struct gensio *io);
.TP 20
.B bool gensio_is_packet(struct gensio *io);
.TP 20
.B bool gensio_is_authenticated(struct gensio *io);
.TP 20
.B bool gensio_is_encrypted(struct gensio *io);
.TP 20
.B bool gensio_is_message(struct gensio *io);
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.B gensio_get_type
return the type string for the gensio (if
.I depth
is 0) or one of its children
.I (depth > 0).
Returns NULL if the depth is greater than the number of children.

.B gensio_get_child
returns the given child of the gensio, returns NULL if the
.I depth
is greater than the number of children.

.B gensio_is_client
returns true if the gensio a client or false if it is a server.

.B gensio_is_reliable
return true if the genio is reliable (won't loose data).  Serial
devices are not considered reliable, nor is UDP.  Pretty much
everything else is, because they won't drop data and are
flow-controlled.

.B gensio_is_packet
returns if the genio is packet-oriented.  In a packet-oriented genio,
if one side writes a chunk of data, when the other side does a read it
will get the same chunk of data as a single unit assuming it's buffer
sizes are set properly.

.B gensio_is_authenticated
return true if the remote end authenticated, false if not.  In the SSL
case, this means that the remote certificate was received and verified
(client and server, see gensio(5) SSL section for details).  For
certauth server, this means that the authentication successfully
authenticated the certauth client by either certificate or password.

.B gensio_is_encrypted
returns true if the connection is encrypted, false if not.

.B gensio_is_message
returns if the genio is message-oriented.  In a message-oriented
genio, a write can explicitly mark message boundaries, these are
delivered to the reader with those boundaries set.  See gensio(5) for
details on how this works.

Note that for the "gensio_is_xxx" type of requests, the properly is
usually inherited from the child.  So if you run a telnet gensio on
top of an SSL gensio, the telnet gensio will return true for
.B gensio_is_encrypted
because SSL is encrypted.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
gensio_err(3), gensio(5), gensio_os_funcs(3)
