.TH gensio_acc_control 3 "27 Feb 2019"
.SH NAME
gensio_acc_control \- Perform gensio accepter specific actions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <gensio/gensio.h>
.TP 20
.B int gensio_acc_control(struct gensio_accepter *acc, int depth,
.br
.B                    bool get, unsigned int option,
.br
.B                    char *data, gensiods *datalen);
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.B gensio_acc_control
performs a gensio accepter specific operation on the gensio accepter.
This works exactly like gensio_control(3), see that for details on get,
depth, and how the data and datalen work.

gensio control operations in
.I option
depend on the particular gensio.  Below some are documented, but there
may be other controls available.  See the gensio documentation in
gensio(5) for details.
.SS "GENSIO_ACC_CONTROL_LADDR"
Return the given local address for the given gensio.  Since a single
gensio may have more than one local address, this control provides a
means to tell which one.  The
.I data
string passed in should be the string representation of a the number (like
created with snprintf()) for the particular index you want to fetch.  If
you specify a number larger than the number of open listen sockets,
.I GE_NOTFOUND
is returned.  The return data is a string holding the address.

Note that a single fetched string may contain more than one address.
These will be separated by semicolons.  In some cases addresses may
change dynamically (like with SCTP), so you get a single set of
addresses.
.SS "GENSIO_ACC_CONTROL_LPORT"
Return the port for the given local address for the given gensio.
Since a single gensio may have more than one local address, this
control provides a means to tell which one.  The
.I data
string passed in should be the string representation of a the number (like
created with snprintf()) for the particular index you want to fetch.  If
you specify a number larger than the number of open listen sockets,
.I GE_NOTFOUND
is returned.  The return data is a string holding the port number.
.SS "GENSIO_ACC_CONTROL_TCPDNAME"
Get or set the TCPD name for the gensio, only for TCP gensios.

.SH "RETURN VALUES"
Zero is returned on success, or a gensio error on failure.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
gensio_err(3), gensio(5), gensio_control(3)
